Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Crews.
And Daryl Lane.
If there's such a thing as a science fiction connoisseur, he would have to be a Jack Vance fan.
Vance is a distinctive author who's been writing science fiction and fantasy since the 1940s.
And even in a field like science fiction, Vance's imagination is remarkable.
His depiction of alien worlds, for instance, impresses any reader.
He has a powerful, subtle style with the colors and textures of his descriptions
and his careful attention to the resources of language.
He can make you believe you're on another planet, somehow involved in an alien culture.
We might mention the Durdane trilogy or the four novels of the Tschai or Planet of Adventure series
as examples of Vance's skill at creating alien environments and cultures.
Vance always wanted to be a writer and he chose science fiction for the simplest of reasons.
First, I had a toy with the idea of my life.
And in order to find some way of making a living where I could travel, be my own boss,
for 21 hours, and writing the way that suggests itself.
And so I kind of, even when I was only 12 years old, I told myself I kind of liked to be a writer.
Why I chose science fiction, I don't know, or fantasy, whatever you want to call it.
I'd put out as a kid, I'd done a lot of reading.
Well, I've done a lot of reading in everything as far as I could.
But I think I probably more touched my, not influenced in a word, but influenced, I guess,
you might say, by the fantasy and the so-called science fiction rather than by much anything else.
As we've said, Vance started back in the 1940s in the Pulp magazines,
and his early work lacks the polish and distinctive flair that he's known for.
I was learning my trade. I just got started writing, not as real young as some guys did.
In fact, I was doing lots of those things.
And then I decided I was going to be a writer, and I started writing.
I had all the talents for it, I guess, apparently.
But I didn't have the knack or the practice, or whatever you want to call it, of putting the words together.
And also, I was trying to write the wrong kind of story.
Those days, the gadget story was very big.
And I'd waste a lot of time trying to write gadget stories on scientific breakthroughs and things like that,
which is essentially kind of a line-allic, I think.
And it's a phase of the field which is mercifully going over the hill.
I've got a very good scientific background, it's not that I don't know science, I do know it.
I was going to be a physicist, actually, for a while.
In the 40s and 50s, I was writing in the barrimony, collecting rejection slips.
There was an apprentice period in which I was paid not very much for it, but, you know, Jack once in a while.
But essentially, those 40 and 50 stories, they're not much good, they're not worth it.
A gadget suit forget them.
Vance's apprenticeship must have been well spent.
The science fiction and fantasy he's been writing ever since is masterful.
In 1963, he won the Hugo Award for the Dragon Masters.
And in 1966, he won both the Nebula and Hugo Awards for The Last Castle.
Tomorrow, more with Jack Vance.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association,
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lank.
And David Crews.
Jack Vance has created a unique, vivid and fascinating body of science fiction and fantasy.
He began his career in the pulp magazines of the 1940s, and he wrote the gadget stories that were popular then.
But over the years, he's developed a deeper, more subtle and distinctive type of science fiction and fantasy.
Yet the curious fact is that not many people, even science fiction readers, have heard of Jack Vance.
We asked him why he thought that was so.
I think another thing too that I've developed rather gradually in reach of my presence, whatever you want to call it,
by kind of back way, inconspicuously.
I remember Clark at the Home Courts in 2001,
highlighting strange and estranged land or whatever children's books are, or through gambles.
And it's a...
I've never been associated with anything that has any other publicity attached to it.
So I just seem to arrive on the scene, so it seems to me, if I were looking at my own career in this way,
I would be kind of quietly from northeast somewhere rather than through having a movie or something or so.
Lately, Vance has been writing three, four, and even five novel series set on alien planets.
He's noted for his imaginative descriptions of alien settings and cultures more than anything else.
The four books in the Chai series, or the Durdane trilogy, are good examples of stories set in convincingly alien environments.
Vance is also recognized for the stories in the Dying Earth series.
And don't forget, Vance has written excellent mystery fiction, even winning the Edgar Award from the Mystery Writers of America in 1960 for his book, The Man in the Cage.
Even though some readers talk of a unique Vance style, Vance himself says he has no particular style or writing characteristics.
I don't have any style. All I do is try to write whatever in the best possible way.
Now, if you take the trouble to read some of my murder mysteries, you'll find that they're written in a different way.
Everything you write, everything I write, everything anybody writes, the style or the way the words are put together
is part of the mood of the story. It is part of the story itself. It's part of the complete product.
Now, when you say, why did I, how did I evolve this, that implies that I have one style that I use for everything from this early Dying Earth thing
up to one of the mystery stories with localum in the countryside out here called Fox Valley Murders.
If you take the trouble to examine the way the words are put together, you'll find it totally different.
Also like the bad rattle, which is a spence story, the way that the words go together, or different from the way the words go together,
and say, oh, I don't know what. No, I don't have any style.
Vance considers himself a storyteller or entertainer with no access to grind. He's reluctant to provide explanations or analyses of his work.
When asked about a particular character or episode in one of his works, Vance has a characteristic reply.
Well, I think everybody will have to answer that for themselves.
Reading the science fiction of Jack Vance makes answering questions like that worthwhile. More with Jack Vance tomorrow.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Crews.
And Daryl Lane.
The dying earth stories of Jack Vance, one of the most exquisite creations in the realm of science fantasy.
The setting for the stories is a bit unusual.
It's earth, but an earth so many millions of centuries into the future that it's almost dead.
And so is the sun, sputtering like a candle ready to go out, and baiting earth in its final pale red light.
There are only a few people left on earth, and most of these are sorcerers, since magic works and science has been forgotten.
Vance says the dying earth stories are some of the earliest things he ever wrote.
Well, the funny thing about it is that was written before I started selling.
That was written in C, as well as merchant C.
And I didn't have quite a bit of spare time to begin writing these flamboyant, highly colored stories.
But those were written all very, very early.
They were written before I started selling.
So they're just representative of kind of rather early, early stage.
And then when I started writing the so-called gadget fiction or other stuff,
I changed the style of the dying earth stuff.
It wasn't at all suitable for writing the stuff I began selling.
Stuff to stuff I was selling with it, because it wasn't.
But at least the style of the dying earth would have been absolutely,
uh, what sort of color was it?
Wouldn't it fit it for you to give it a try?
Many readers believe the style of the stories, which Vance calls flamboyant and highly colored,
to be the most marvelous and vivid thing about them.
It creates an exotic yet wistful atmosphere, somehow appropriate for a world on the edge of extinction.
Tim Underwood is a friend of Vance's, and along with Chuck Miller, publishes Vance's work in specially made collector's editions.
The Underwood Miller Publishing Company's first book was The Dying Earth. We asked Tim Underwood why.
A lot of science fiction and fantasy, and sometimes the best of it, does not get published in hardcover editions.
And The Dying Earth was the first book we did, and it was just a book that is essentially a, it's a classic.
It was published in 1950 as a paperback, and it had never been in hardcover.
And it's one of the outstanding books in the fantasy field, and 200 years from now people will be reading it.
And it had never been in a durable hardcover edition, and so we put it in one.
Vance didn't write any new Dying Earth material for 15 years after the book's original publication in 1950.
We asked him if it was perhaps reader responses, which caused him to take it up again.
No, it's been, I don't, I just, well, we're going to do some more stuff in there.
In this, this character was, uh, swarming around in my head.
The character swarming around in his head was Kugel, a picker-esque rogue who survives on the Dying Earth through his wits and his nimble fingers.
The Kugel stories were collected in 1966 in a book entitled The Eyes of the Overworld.
Since then, Vance has written other Kugel stories, and says he'll do more in the future, so the Dying Earth isn't dead yet.
More on Jack Vance tomorrow.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane.
And David Crews.
Jack Vance is one of the major talents that the field of fantasy and science fiction has produced.
Tim Underwood, his friend and publisher, offers some reasons why.
I think Jack has accomplished some things with some of his works that have never been done before.
Not only in terms of style, but in terms of feeling, he hearkens to a certain spirit, I think.
A certain kind of person, a certain kind of spirit, is on his wavelengths and responds strongly to his work.
The latter part of his work and the best of his work is extremely well crafted.
He's a craftsman, very well written, and accomplishes a lot of really unusual things in a very quiet way.
Vance's accomplishments have been impressive.
His science fiction career spans almost 40 years and began back in the Pulp Era.
He's won the major awards for his science fiction and fantasy writer.
One is the Hugo Award, awarded by readers, and the other is the Nebula Award, given by other writers.
Some of his best known work includes The Dying Earth Stories, which go all the way back to his beginnings as a writer in the 40s, and more recently, the five demon princes novels.
Still, Vance hasn't received much recognition. We asked Underwood why.
My feeling is that one responds strongly to Vance, one who feels much the same way about the world that he does.
I think, why doesn't he though as popular as, say, John Lai Corre, who I think people respond to in the same way?
Well, Vance is more of a rarefied taste, I think, is the kind of things that he feels are important.
The strangeness in the world about us and the unusual qualities of life itself, those kind of considerations are not important to a lot of people.
People who do feel these things strongly are going to like Vance's rights. They're going to enjoy reading. They're going to enjoy the world that he's created.
He's not done a lot of the things that make other writers successful. Like, he's never stayed with one character.
The way that, say, Lai Corre stayed with Smiley, or the way that someone writes a Doc Savage novel 15 times in a row, or whatever.
He hasn't done that. And he hasn't had one hero that he's repeated for any great number of books.
And he hasn't had one contemporary theme that appeals to people like the Battle of the Sexes or something like that. Those aren't Jack's themes.
Jack's considerations and themes are enormously subtle and kind of a rarefied nature.
Vance has always been reluctant to discuss his own work or to offer any insights into his themes or intentions. Underwood suggests a reason.
Jack always says that he wants his work to span for and by itself. I think he just wants to be remembered for his work.
He refuses to pick favorites among his work. I know he likes his Demon Prince series a lot for good reason.
He likes The Palace of Love, which is the third in that series. He likes the Eyes of the Overworld, the sequenced stories of the fellow Cuckoo.
And that's partly because Cuckoo is a rascal, and Vance and Soft is a bit of a rascal.
And Cuckoo is even more so. He's the kind of a rascal that Vance would like to be if he wasn't such a nice guy at heart.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Music
This is The Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy. And here are your hosts.
This is David Crews and Daryl Lane. In 1975, a science fiction and fantasy publishing company was formed because two men wanted to get one particular science fantasy book between hard covers.
Tim Underwood, one of the men, explains.
In 1975, I decided I wanted to publish a book, specifically I wanted to publish The Dying Earth in a hardcover form.
And I was a used book dealer, and Chuck Miller was a used book dealer dealing in rare and out of print books and some new material.
And we knew of each other, and I think we had bought and sold books from each other from time to time.
And Chuck heard about, I may have mentioned in a letter about The Dying Earth, and Chuck offered his expertise because he knew a good deal about certain parts of publishing industry, about distribution and that end of it.
And my experience, my limited experience, had to do with just graphically putting a book together.
And so he suggested that we do the book together. And so we did.
And the interesting thing is that we never met each other until the book had already been published, and that was a year later in 1976.
And up to that time, we were literally exchanging thousands of dollars to the mail and doing business without ever having met each other.
We were in a sense complete strangers.
But we had this one connection, and that is we both felt strongly about this one work of Fancy The Dying Earth, and about Fancy's work in general,
and specifically about fantasy and science fiction and horror and literature.
Since that first book, The Underwood Miller Company has published some 50 books, All Science Fiction, Fantasy and Horror.
Their print runs for each volume average of 1,000 copies, hardly enough to compete with the large New York publishers. Underwood explains why.
We're selling to collectors, and the collectors are buying these books with the knowledge that they're going to go out of print and become valuable later on.
Another reason is that Chuck and I don't own a warehouse, and we are not in business to have a large inventory.
We would make more money if we printed more books, because as you print more books, the cost per book of manufacturing goes down dramatically.
But we just simply can't afford to have a lot of books in inventory sitting around.
Our books go out of print in about nine months, and this is just the opposite of a major manufacturer, like Dutton or Brown or someone like that.
They want their book to stay in print as long as possible, and we want our books to go out of print as soon as possible.
Tim Underwood and Chuck Miller have a sincere interest in significant works of science fiction and fantasy.
That is just a pleasure of bookmaking. Just a pleasure. Chuck and I both take a great pleasure in making a good book.
A book that has its signature sound, which is something that doesn't occur in general trade, hardcover publishing anymore.
A book that's printed on acid-free paper so that in 20 or 30 years the paper won't turn brittle and brown.
And just a well-made, well-bound book, attractively made and artistically put together.
And do a publishing a book like that, creating a book like that, is really a pleasure.
Underwood and Miller are publishing books by many authors in beautifully illustrated editions now.
Anyone who likes fantasy and science fiction, and anyone who likes books, should search out some of their work and hold on to it.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association,
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Thank you.